
In theory there is no difference between theory and practice.
In practice there is. Yogi Berra

Introduction to CSS

This document gives an introduction to CSS (Cascading Style Sheets),
including its purpose and structure, and some details about selectors,
properties, and property values.

Purpose

CSS is a stylesheet language. A stylesheet is a collection of styles
for styling documents. Styling can range from high-level overall layout
of a document to precise details such as font size. CSS was developed
to work well for Web pages written in HTML. In theory, it is possible
to use other stylesheet languages for styling Web pages, but in practice,
CSS is the only choice.

CSS can also be used for other XML documents.
Parts of CSS are also used in other technologies.
CSS properties are used in SVG and XSL. CSS selectors are used in many
libraries to select parts of a document. Therefore, learning CSS is useful
even if you are not very interested in Web page design.

[Aside] A Very Short History of CSS
CSS was created by Håkon Wium Lie and Bert Bos at W3C. There were originally 
many different proposals for how styling should be handled, but eventually
CSS won. Today, the CSS specification is split into many modules that can
be on different levels.

Separating style (CSS) and structure (HTML markup) of documents is
important for the following six reasons:
1. The same style can be used for more than one Web page,
   or even one or more Web sites.
2. Web page source is simpler and cleaner, thus easier to read and write.
3. The amount of data to be downloaded when accessing Web pages
   is reduced.
4. Changing the styles on a Web page or a Web site is easier.
5. Work can easily be split between Web designers (CSS) and
   authors/editors (HTML).
6. Different style sheets can be used for screen display, for print,
   and for other cases.
   
CSS is not an exact style sheet language. Even with the same style sheet,
a Web page may look slightly different on different computers and with
different browsers. For example, not all computers have the
same fonts. CSS makes it easy to specify only part of the style,
leaving the rest to the browser.
   
A Simple Example

This is a simple CSS stylesheet:

body { font-size: 14pt; font-family: serif;
       line-height: 120%;
       background-color: lightgreen;
     }
h1 { font-size: 130%; font-weight: bold; }
h2 { font-size: 120%; margin-before: 0.5em; }
h3 { font-size: 110%; }
p  { text-indent: 1.5em; }
aside { float: right; width: 40%; font-size: 90%; }

This stylesheet has 6 style rules. The first rule says that the body
font size is 14 points, the font should have serifs, the line height
is 120% of the font size (i.e. the space between the lines is 20%
of the font size), and the background color is light green.

Basic Syntax

The main elements of the CSS syntax are selectors, properties, and
property values. A CSS stylesheet is a collection of rules.
Each rule consists of some selector(s) and a declaration block in brackets.
A declaration block contains some declarations, separated or terminated
by semicolons. A declaration consists of a property name and a property
value.

In the above example, body and h1 are examples of selectors.
{ font-size: 110%; } is a declaration block. background-color: #FCF and
margin-before: 0.5em are declarations. font-weight and float are
property names. 14pt, bold, and 90% are property values.

Comments can be included in CSS. They start with /* and end with */.
This is the same as in the programming language C. But CSS does not
support // comments the way modern C compilers do.

Parsing of CSS is tolerant to unknown selectors, property names,
and property values. This makes it easy to introduce new properties.
When using a new property, stylesheet designers have to be careful
that the stylesheet still works well on browsers that do not support
the new property.

Selectors

Selectors define where the style in the following declaration block
is applied. The following table gives examples of the main types of
selectors and their meaning:

selector example  selector type          applicability

*                 universal selector     matches any element
body              element name           element content (and all its subelements)
.warning          class selector         elements with class='warning'
#syntax           id selector            element with id='syntax'
a:link            link pseudoclass       link that is not yet visited
a:visited         visited pseudoclass    link that was visited
p code            descendant combinator  code element somewhere in p
p > code          child combinator       code element that is a child of p

More selectors can be found in Selectors Level 3.

Properties

Properties indicate what kind of style setting should be done. There are
properties for margins, borders, fonts, colors, backgrounds, columns, grids,
scrolling, animation, relative and absolute positioning, and many more.
Properties often come in groups, for example font, font-family, font-size,
font-weight, and so on.

Cascading Style Sheets, level 1 started with about 50 properties. The
CSS Snapshot 2023 lists about 300 properties. You can use the
caniuse.com Web site to find out on which browsers and which versions
of a browser a property is supported.

Property Values

Property values define the exact setting of a property. Many properties
have the same or similar property values, e.g. for colors and sizes.

There are two ways to indicate colors, by name and numerically.
Color names come from a long list defined in CSS Color Module Level 3.
Numerical color values can be of the form #rgb or #rrggbb or rgb(r,g,b).
There are also notations for other color spaces such as RGBA and HSL.

Sizes can be absolute or relative. They are defined in
CSS Values and Units Module Level 3. Absolute sizes can be
units such as pt (point), cm, or mm. Relative sizes can be expressed
in percent (%) or em (the height of an uppercase M).

There are many other kinds of property values.
Please check which property values can be used with which property.

How to Apply CSS to HTML

There are several different ways to apply CSS to HTML. The best way is
to have external style sheets and to link them to HTML with the
link element in the head element. The following is an example:

<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="my_stylesheet.css">

A second way is to include some style rules in a style element in the
head element of an HTML document. A third way is to add some declarations
in a style attribute on a specific element. These ways are only suited
for specific local style settings, and are not recommended. But they take
priority over external stylesheet settings.

[Aside] SCSS
CSS does not allow to nest selectors and declaration blocks.
For large style sheets, such nesting can be convenient.
SCSS is an extension of CSS to provide nesting and some other
additional features. Browsers do not understand it, so SCSS
has to be converted to CSS on the server side. Recently, a
CSS Nesting Module has been proposed, so this may change.

Cascading

We finally come to the explanation of the 'C' in CSS. CSS stylesheets
work by cascading. The same property can be set to different values
on the same text. Such settings can come from different style sheets,
style elements, and style attributes. They can come from outer elements
(such as the body element) or from inner elements. They can apply to an
element, a class, or an id. They can come from a shorthand property that
sets several related properties together (such as font or border)
or from a more specific property (such as font-size or border-right-color).
They can also come from an author stylesheet, a user stylesheet, or a
browser stylesheet.

All these settings are cascaded. Longer selectors win over shorter selectors.
Inner settings win over outer settings. Later settings (e.g. in the same
stylesheet) win over earlier settings. Understanding these precedences,
one can write short and precise stylesheets.
